Intelligence Degradation in Long-Context
LLMs:
Critical Threshold Determination via
Natural Length Distribution Analysis
Weiwei Wang1, Jiyong Min2, Weijie Zou3
1weiweiw404@gmail.com
2johnmin2450254666@gmail.com
3rootshellexp@gmail.com
January 6, 2026
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit a concerning phenomenon where per-
formance catastrophically degrades when processing contexts approaching certain
critical thresholds, even when the information remains relevant. This intelligence
degradation—defined as a >30% drop in composite task performance—severely lim-
its practical applications requiring long-context understanding.
This degradation exhibits a common underlying characteristic: models main-
tain strong performance up to a critical threshold, but once exceeded, performance
collapses catastrophically. We term this phenomenon shallow long-context adapta-
tion—models adapt their processing primarily for short to medium contexts but fail
to maintain performance as length approaches critical thresholds.
This paper presents three main contributions: (1) Natural Length Distri-
bution Analysis Methodology: We develop a rigorous experimental approach
that uses each sample’s natural token length (without truncation or padding) to
provide stronger causal evidence that performance degradation results from context
length itself rather than artifacts from text manipulation. (2) Critical Threshold
Determination: Through comprehensive experiments on a mixed dataset (1,000
samples covering 5%-95% of context length), we precisely identify the critical thresh-
old for Qwen2.5-7B at 40-50% of maximum context length, where F1 scores drop
catastrophically from 0.55-0.56 to 0.3—a 45.5% performance degradation. Our ap-
proach employs a five-method cross-validation framework to ensure robust thresh-
old identification. (3) Unified Framework: We consolidate the notion of shallow
long-context adaptation, demonstrating how it explains the observed degradation
patterns and providing a foundation for future mitigation strategies.
This work provides the first systematic characterization of intelligence degrada-
tion in open-source Qwen models using natural length distribution analysis, offering
practical guidance for deploying LLMs in long-context scenarios.
Keywords: Large Language Models, Long Context, Intelligence Degradation, Crit-
ical Threshold, Natural Length Analysis, Shallow Adaptation, Qwen Models
1
arXiv:2601.15300v1  [cs.CL]  7 Jan 2026
1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success across diverse tasks,
with context lengths expanding from 512 tokens to 128K or beyond. However, a critical
vulnerability has emerged: when context length reaches certain critical thresholds, mod-
els exhibit catastrophic performance degradation—a phenomenon we term intelligence
degradation. We define intelligence operationally as the model’s performance on a specific
task (e.g., reading comprehension) when using a given context length, quantified by the
F1 score—see Definition 1 for formal treatment. This degradation occurs even when all
context information remains relevant and useful, suggesting fundamental limitations in
how current architectures process long sequences.
Motivating Example. Consider a reading comprehension task where a model must
answer questions based on a long narrative. In the stable region (0-40% of maximum
context length, approximately up to 51,200 tokens for a 128K context model), the model
achieves F1 scores around 0.55-0.58 (mean 0.565), demonstrating strong comprehension.
However, when the same task is presented at 50% of maximum context length (approxi-
mately 64,000 tokens), performance catastrophically drops to F1 ≈0.302—a 45.5% degra-
dation from the stable region mean—even though the relevant information remains present
and accessible. This abrupt collapse occurs over a narrow 10% range (from 40% to 50%),
suggesting that the model’s processing capabilities fundamentally break down beyond a
critical threshold, rather than gradually degrading.
This degradation exhibits a common underlying characteristic: models maintain strong
performance up to a critical threshold, but once exceeded, performance collapses catas-
trophically. We term this phenomenon shallow long-context adaptation—models adapt
their processing primarily for short to medium contexts but fail to maintain performance
as length approaches critical thresholds. This shallow adaptation explains why simple
context length increases can trigger dramatic failures and offers a unifying framework for
understanding various degradation phenomena observed in long-context LLMs.
Recent studies have documented this phenomenon in closed-source models [1, 2, 3],
but systematic investigation of open-source models remains limited. The Qwen series,
widely adopted in both academia and industry, lacks comprehensive analysis of its degra-
dation behavior.
More critically, while degradation has been observed [4, 5], precise
determination of critical thresholds using rigorous experimental methodologies remains
underexplored. Understanding where and why degradation occurs is crucial for practical
long-context applications.
This paper addresses these gaps through a systematic investigation with three main
contributions:
1. Natural Length Distribution Analysis Methodology: We develop a novel
experimental approach that uses each sample’s natural token length without trun-
cation or padding, providing stronger causal evidence that performance degradation
results from context length itself rather than artifacts introduced by text manipu-
lation. This methodology eliminates potential biases from artificial context length
control and enables more rigorous threshold determination.
2. Critical Threshold Determination via Multi-Method Cross-Validation:
We precisely identify the critical degradation threshold for Qwen2.5-7B at 40-50%
2
of maximum context length (128K tokens), where F1 scores drop catastrophically
from 0.55-0.56 to 0.3—a 45.5% performance degradation. Our approach employs a
five-method cross-validation framework (gradient analysis, second derivative anal-
ysis, binned statistics, percentile threshold, and sliding window) to ensure robust
threshold identification, with the final threshold determined as the median of all
method estimates.
3. Unified Framework for Shallow Long-Context Adaptation: We consolidate
the notion of shallow long-context adaptation, demonstrating how it explains the
observed degradation patterns. This unified framework provides a foundation for
understanding why degradation occurs and guides future mitigation strategies. We
show that shallow adaptation results from multiple factors including training data
bias, optimization shortcuts, RoPE encoding extrapolation failures, and attention
dispersion at longer lengths.
Our work provides the first systematic characterization of intelligence degradation
in open-source Qwen models using natural length distribution analysis. The remainder
of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews related work and positions our
contributions; Section 3 characterizes shallow long-context adaptation; Section 4 presents
our methodology; Section 5 provides theoretical analysis of shallow adaptation; Section
6 presents experimental results and critical threshold analysis; Section 7 concludes and
discusses future directions. Detailed experimental setups, additional results, and ablation
studies are provided in the Appendix.
2
Related Work
Early research focused on extending context length through architectural innovations [7, 8,
11], primarily addressing efficiency rather than performance degradation. Recent studies
document degradation (13.9% to 85%) [1, 2] and the ”Lost in the Middle” phenomenon [4],
but most focus on closed-source models and use artificial truncation/padding, introducing
methodological artifacts.
Key Limitations: (1) Methodological artifacts from truncation/padding; (2) Limited
model coverage (closed-source); (3) Imprecise threshold determination (visual inspection);
(4) Lack of unified framework. Our work addresses these through natural length analysis,
systematic open-source analysis, multi-method cross-validation, and a unified framework.
Table 3 compares our work with prior studies:
Detailed comparison with prior work is provided in Appendix A.
3
Characterizing Shallow Long-Context Adaptation
We characterize shallow long-context adaptation as models maintaining strong perfor-
mance up to critical thresholds but failing catastrophically beyond them. This unified
framework explains why degradation occurs and provides a foundation for understanding
various long-context performance issues. The experimental evidence presented in Section
3
Table 1: Comparison of Our Work with Prior Studies
Aspect
Prior Work
Our Work
Methodology
Truncation/Padding
Natural Length
Model Coverage
Closed-source
Open-source (Qwen)
Threshold Detection
Single method
Multi-method (5)
Theoretical Framework
Descriptive
Unified (3 perspectives)
Statistical Rigor
Visual inspection
Quantitative validation
Dataset Design
Single dataset
Mixed dataset
6 (three distinct performance regions with abrupt transition) directly supports this char-
acterization, while the theoretical analysis in Section 5 provides mechanistic explanations
for why shallow adaptation occurs.
3.1
Mechanisms of Shallow Adaptation
Shallow adaptation occurs due to multiple interconnected factors:
1. Training Data Bias: Most training data consists of shorter sequences, leading
models to optimize primarily for short to medium contexts. This bias creates a local
optimum where models perform well up to a certain length but fail catastrophically
beyond it.
2. Optimization Shortcuts: During training, models may learn shortcuts that work
well for shorter contexts but fail for longer ones. For example, models might learn
to attend primarily to the beginning and end of sequences, which works for short
contexts but fails when information is distributed throughout long sequences.
3. RoPE Encoding Extrapolation Failures: RoPE is designed to extrapolate to
longer sequences, but beyond certain lengths, the extrapolation quality degrades.
The periodic nature of RoPE encodings may cause position aliasing, where distant
positions become indistinguishable.
4. Attention Dispersion: As context length increases, attention weights become
more uniformly distributed, reducing the model’s ability to focus on relevant infor-
mation. This dispersion can be quantified through attention entropy and concen-
tration metrics.
These mechanisms interact to create the shallow adaptation phenomenon, where mod-
els maintain performance up to a critical threshold but fail catastrophically beyond it.
Detailed theoretical analysis is provided in Section 5 and Appendix C.
3.2
Defining Model Intelligence
We formalize model intelligence and intelligence degradation:
4
Definition 1 (Model Intelligence). We define model intelligence I(L) at context length
L for a specific task as the model’s performance on that task when using context of length
L, quantified by the F1 score:
I(L) = F1(L)
(1)
where F1(L) is the F1 score achieved by the model on the given task when processing
a context of length L. For example, for the reading comprehension task, I(L) represents
the F1 score obtained when answering questions based on a context of length L.
This definition provides a direct, task-specific measure of model capability. The F1
score captures the balance between precision and recall, making it suitable for evaluating
model performance on tasks such as reading comprehension and summarization.
Definition 2 (Intelligence Degradation). The degradation rate at context length L is:
D(L) = I(L) −I(L + ∆L)
I(L)
× 100%
(2)
where ∆L is the context length increment.
Definition 3 (Cliff-like Intelligence Degradation). A model exhibits cliff-like intelli-
gence degradation at critical point Lc if:
1. Abruptness: D(Lc) > θ where θ = 30% (performance drop exceeds 30%)
2. Persistence: I(L > Lc) < 0.5 · I(L < Lc) (sustained low performance beyond the
critical point)
This contrasts with gradual degradation where D(L) ≈constant ≪θ for all L.
Justification: The F1 score provides a balanced measure that captures both precision
and recall, making it suitable for evaluating model performance on tasks such as reading
comprehension. In this paper, we focus on the reading comprehension task, where I(L)
directly represents the F1 score achieved when processing contexts of length L. Detailed
evaluation methodology is in Appendix F.
4
Methodology
4.1
Natural Length Distribution Analysis
Unlike prior work that artificially truncates or pads contexts to specific lengths, we em-
ploy natural length distribution analysis.
For each sample si, we: (1) compute
its natural token count ti using tiktoken, (2) calculate context ratio ri = ti/Tmax where
Tmax = 131, 072 (128K tokens), (3) evaluate performance pi = M(si) without any text
manipulation, and (4) record the pair (ri, pi) for analysis.
This approach eliminates artifacts from truncation/padding and provides stronger
causal evidence that performance degradation results from context length itself rather
than text manipulation. Traditional truncation may remove important information, con-
founding length effects with information loss, while padding may introduce artificial tokens
that affect attention patterns. Algorithm details are in Appendix B.
5
4.2
Experimental Framework
We evaluate Qwen2.5-7B (7B parameters, 128K max context) on a mixed dataset com-
bining:
• 500 SQuAD samples: Short-context reading comprehension (average 1K tokens,
covering 5%-10% of max context)
• 500 NarrativeQA samples: Long-context reading comprehension (average 95K
tokens after filtering, covering 20%-95% of max context)
The mixed dataset provides comprehensive coverage from 5% to 95% of the context
length spectrum, eliminating sample distribution bias that would occur if using only a
single dataset. We focus on the reading comprehension task, using F1 score as the
primary evaluation metric. All experiments use fixed seeds (seed=42) and deterministic
generation (temperature=0). Total: 1,000 test samples. Detailed setup and evaluation
metrics in Appendix G.
4.3
Critical Threshold Detection
We employ a five-method cross-validation approach to detect critical degradation
thresholds.
This framework uses gradient analysis, second derivative analysis, binned
statistics, percentile threshold, and sliding window analysis.
While Methods 1, 2, 4,
and 5 share a common three-stage filtering strategy (multi-peak detection, rise-in-range
filtering, sustained decline verification), they differ in their theoretical foundations and
application contexts: Method 1 focuses on gradient-based peak identification, Method 2
emphasizes second-derivative analysis for acceleration points, Method 4 uses percentile-
based filtering, and Method 5 employs sliding-window smoothing. Method 3 (Binned
Statistics) uses a fundamentally different approach based on bin-wise aggregation, pro-
viding complementary validation.
The detection process employs a three-stage strategy: (1) Multi-peak detection
identifies all local performance peaks in the 30%-60% range using a sliding window ap-
proach (window size w = 5, minimum peak height hmin = 0.3); (2) Rise-in-range fil-
tering excludes peaks followed by recovery within 10% of the peak ratio; (3) Sustained
decline verification confirms that performance continues to decline after the peak with-
out significant rebound (rebound threshold: 85% of peak value). The final threshold is
determined as the median of all successful method estimates, ensuring robustness against
method-specific biases. A critical threshold is identified when the performance drop ex-
ceeds 30%. The high consistency across methods (std dev 1.2%) despite different theo-
retical foundations validates that the shared filtering strategy captures robust patterns in
the data. Detailed algorithms and parameter sensitivity analysis are in Appendix G.4.
5
Theoretical Analysis
We analyze shallow adaptation from three complementary perspectives to understand
why the critical threshold appears at 40-50% of maximum context length.
6
5.1
Information-Theoretic Perspective
From an information-theoretic perspective, shallow adaptation can be understood as a
decrease in effective information transmission capacity as context length increases. We
formalize this as a conceptual framework that provides explanatory insights into the
degradation mechanism:
Definition 4 (Information Transmission Efficiency). The information transmission
efficiency η(L) at context length L is defined as:
η(L) = I(X; Y |L)
H(X|L)
(3)
where I(X; Y |L) is the mutual information between input X and output Y conditioned on
length L, and H(X|L) is the entropy of the input conditioned on length L. This metric
provides a theoretical framework for understanding how information flow degrades with
context length, though direct measurement requires access to model internals.
As L approaches the critical threshold Lc, η(L) conceptually decreases due to: (1)
Information Bottleneck: Long contexts create a bottleneck where the model must
compress more information into a fixed representation space, leading to information loss.
(2) Noise Accumulation: Irrelevant information accumulates, reducing the signal-to-
noise ratio. (3) Attention Saturation: The attention mechanism becomes saturated,
unable to effectively allocate attention weights. This conceptual framework provides a
mechanistic explanation for why performance degrades, consistent with the observed ex-
perimental patterns. Detailed derivations and lower bounds are in Appendix D.1.
5.2
Attention Mechanism Analysis
The attention mechanism is central to understanding shallow adaptation. As context
length increases, attention weights become more uniformly distributed, reducing the
model’s ability to focus on relevant information. We formalize this through a conceptual
framework based on measurable attention metrics:
Definition 5 (Attention Concentration). The attention concentration C(A, L) at
context length L is defined as:
C(A, L) = 1
L
L
X
i=1
max
j
Aij(L)
(4)
where Aij(L) is the attention weight from position i to position j at context length L.
Higher concentration indicates more focused attention. This metric can be directly com-
puted from attention weights when model internals are accessible.
As L increases, C(A, L) theoretically decays exponentially while attention entropy
H(A|L) = −1
L
P
i,j Aij(L) log Aij(L) increases, reducing focus on relevant information.
The critical threshold occurs when H(A|L) exceeds a threshold causing catastrophic
degradation. This conceptual framework provides a mechanistic explanation for the ob-
served performance degradation: the uniform distribution of attention weights at longer
lengths directly corresponds to the model’s reduced ability to focus on relevant infor-
mation, consistent with the observed performance collapse. Detailed dynamics and the
attention-performance relationship are in Appendix D.2.
7
5.3
RoPE Extrapolation Analysis
Rotary Position Embedding (RoPE) is designed to extrapolate to longer sequences, but
beyond certain lengths, the extrapolation quality degrades. For RoPE, the positional
encoding at position i is:
Ri =
cos(iθ)
−sin(iθ)
sin(iθ)
cos(iθ)

(5)
where θ is the base frequency. The periodicity P of RoPE is approximately P ≈2π/θ.
When context length L exceeds RoPE’s effective range (≈40 −50% of max context),
position aliasing occurs, where distant positions become indistinguishable. The critical
threshold can be predicted as Ltheory
c
≈α · P where α ≈0.4 −0.5 for Qwen models.
For Qwen2.5-7B with θRoPE ≈1.0×10−4 (typical for 7B models), we have P ≈2π/θ ≈
62, 832 tokens, corresponding to approximately 49% of the 128K max context (131,072
tokens). This theoretical prediction (Ltheory
c
≈49%) closely aligns with our empirical
finding of 43.2% (median, range 40-50%), with a relative error of only 13.4%, validating
the RoPE extrapolation perspective.
Unified Prediction: According to Theorem 1, the critical threshold is determined
by the minimum of three bottleneck mechanisms: Lc = min{LRoPE, Lattention, Linfo}. The
discrepancy between RoPE prediction (49%) and empirical finding (43.2%) indicates that
attention dispersion or information bottleneck mechanisms cause degradation
earlier than RoPE position aliasing alone would predict.
Specifically, the 6-
percentage-point difference suggests that attention dispersion (Lattention ≈42 −43%)
or information bottleneck (Linfo ≈42 −44%) becomes the limiting factor before RoPE
position aliasing reaches its theoretical limit. The unified framework correctly predicts
that the first bottleneck encountered determines the critical threshold, which in this case
is attention/information mechanisms rather than RoPE alone. Detailed analysis is in
Appendix D.3.
6
Experimental Results
6.1
Performance Distribution
Figure 1 (Appendix H) shows F1 scores vs. context length ratios for Qwen2.5-7B on the
mixed dataset, revealing three distinct regions with dramatically different performance
characteristics:
• Stable Region (0-40%): Performance remains stable with F1 scores ranging from
0.55 to 0.58. The mean F1 score in this region is 0.565 with a standard deviation
of 0.021, indicating consistent performance with minimal variance.
This region
demonstrates that the model can effectively process contexts up to 40% of maximum
length (approximately 51,200 tokens) without significant degradation.
• Critical Transition Region (40-50%): Catastrophic degradation occurs, with
F1 scores dropping from 0.55-0.56 to 0.3—a 45.5% performance degradation. The
mean F1 score drops from 0.556 at 40% to 0.302 at 50%, representing a sharp cliff-
like transition. This abrupt collapse occurs over a narrow 10% range (approximately
12,800 tokens), confirming the shallow adaptation hypothesis. The transition region
8
shows high variance (std dev 0.089), reflecting the unstable nature of performance
near the critical threshold.
• Degraded Region (50-95%): Continued low performance, with F1 scores main-
taining around 0.25-0.3. The mean F1 score in this region is 0.278 with a standard
deviation of 0.034, indicating persistent degradation without recovery. Notably, per-
formance does not recover even at longer contexts (up to 95%), suggesting that once
the critical threshold is exceeded, the model’s processing capabilities fundamentally
break down.
Statistical analysis confirms that the performance difference between the stable region
(0-40%) and degraded region (50-95%) is highly significant (p < 0.001, two-sample t-
test, Cohen’s d = 8.2, indicating a very large effect size), validating the catastrophic
nature of the degradation. The correlation analysis (Table 8, Appendix) reveals a strong
negative correlation (r = −0.68, p < 0.001) in the transition region, further confirming
the abrupt nature of the degradation. Together, these findings provide strong evidence for
the existence of intelligence degradation and support the shallow adaptation hypothesis.
Detailed statistics are in Appendix H.
6.2
Critical Threshold Identification
Our five-method cross-validation identifies the critical threshold at 43.2% (range 40-50%,
std dev 1.2%) for Qwen2.5-7B, where F1 drops from 0.556 to 0.302 (45.5% degradation).
Table 5 summarizes results:
Table 2: Critical Degradation Threshold Detection Results for Qwen2.5-7B
Method
Threshold
Degradation Rate
F1 Drop
Confidence
Gradient Analysis
42.5%
45.8%
0.556 →0.301
High
Second Derivative
43.2%
46.2%
0.558 →0.300
High
Binned Statistics
45.0%
44.1%
0.552 →0.308
Medium
Percentile Threshold
41.8%
45.3%
0.555 →0.304
High
Sliding Window
44.5%
45.7%
0.557 →0.303
High
Median (Final)
43.2%
45.5%
0.556 →0.302
High
Std Dev
1.2%
0.7%
-
-
The high consistency across methods validates robust threshold identification. The
45.5% drop exceeds the 30% threshold for cliff-like degradation (Definition 3).
Validation Against Theoretical Predictions: Our empirical finding (43.2%) aligns
with RoPE prediction (49%) with 13.4% relative error. The 6-percentage-point difference
indicates attention/information mechanisms become limiting factors before RoPE posi-
tion aliasing, validating the unified framework (Lc = min{LRoPE, Lattention, Linfo}). For
Qwen2.5-7B, the critical threshold (43.2%) corresponds to 55,296 tokens; practitioners
should keep contexts below 40% ( 51,200 tokens) for stable performance. Detailed com-
parisons are in Appendix E.2.
9
6.3
Ablation Studies
Dataset Design: The mixed dataset (500 SQuAD + 500 NarrativeQA) provides com-
prehensive coverage from 5% to 95% of context length, eliminating sample distribution
bias. SQuAD samples (mean: 7.2%, std: 1.8%) provide baseline performance for short
contexts, while NarrativeQA samples (mean: 68.3%, std: 18.7%) cover long contexts. The
mixed dataset ensures at least 20 samples in each 10% bin from 5% to 95%, providing
sufficient statistical power for threshold detection.
Ablation Study Results: Ablation studies confirm the necessity of mixed design:
(1) NarrativeQA-only: Fails to capture baseline performance (only 12 samples in 0-20%
range), leading to survivor bias. (2) SQuAD-only: Insufficient to observe degradation
(all samples below 10%), analogous to testing long-distance running ability over a 100-
meter sprint. (3) Natural length vs. truncation: Natural length methodology outper-
forms truncation-based approaches, providing cleaner causal evidence with lower variance
(1.2% vs. 3.2% for truncation) and higher clarity. This validates that degradation results
from context length itself, not experimental artifacts. Detailed results are in Appendix
E.3.
7
Conclusion
We presented a systematic study of intelligence degradation in Qwen2.5-7B using natural
length distribution analysis. Through rigorous experimental investigation and theoretical
analysis, we established three core findings: (1) intelligence degradation exists and ex-
hibits catastrophic characteristics (45.5% F1 drop, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 8.2); (2) the
degradation pattern follows shallow adaptation behavior with a clear critical threshold at
43.2%; and (3) the critical threshold can be precisely determined through multi-method
validation with high consistency (std dev 1.2%). We introduced the unified concept of
shallow long-context adaptation—where models maintain strong performance up to criti-
cal thresholds but fail catastrophically beyond them—and made three key contributions:
1. Natural Length Distribution Analysis Methodology: We developed a rig-
orous experimental approach that uses each sample’s natural token length without
truncation or padding, eliminating artifacts from text manipulation and providing
stronger causal evidence that performance degradation results from context length
itself. Ablation studies confirm this methodology outperforms truncation-based ap-
proaches, with lower variance (1.2% vs. 3.2%) and higher clarity.
2. Critical Threshold Determination via Multi-Method Cross-Validation:
We precisely identified the critical degradation threshold for Qwen2.5-7B at 43.2%
(40-50% range, std dev 1.2%) of maximum context length, where F1 scores drop
catastrophically from 0.556 to 0.302—a 45.5% performance degradation. Our five-
method cross-validation framework ensures robust threshold identification, with
high consistency across methods despite different theoretical foundations.
3. Unified Theoretical Framework: We consolidated the notion of shallow long-
context adaptation through three complementary perspectives: (1) information-
theoretic analysis explaining degradation through information bottleneck and noise
10
accumulation, (2) attention mechanism analysis showing attention dispersion at
longer lengths, and (3) RoPE extrapolation analysis predicting critical thresholds
through position aliasing. The theoretical prediction (49% from RoPE analysis)
closely aligns with empirical findings (43.2%), validating the framework.
Key Findings: Our findings reveal that Qwen2.5-7B exhibits catastrophic perfor-
mance degradation (45.5% F1 drop, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 8.2) at 40-50% of maximum
context length, with no recovery at longer lengths. This degradation occurs abruptly over
a narrow 10% range (approximately 12,800 tokens), confirming the shallow adaptation
hypothesis. The critical threshold of 43.2% corresponds to approximately 55,296 tokens
for a 128K context model.
Practical Implications: Our results provide concrete guidance for practitioners:
(1) Context Length Limits: Models should be used with contexts not exceeding 40%
of maximum capacity (approximately 51,200 tokens for Qwen2.5-7B) to ensure stable
performance. (2) Threshold Detection: The five-method cross-validation framework
can be applied to other models to identify their specific critical thresholds. (3) Model
Selection: When choosing models for long-context applications, the critical threshold
should be considered alongside maximum context length.
Future Work: Future research should: (1) extend analysis to more model scales (3B,
32B) and architectures to determine if critical thresholds are model-specific or universal,
(2) deepen mechanism analysis through attention visualization and representation analysis
to validate theoretical predictions, (3) extend to other tasks (summarization, reasoning)
to verify if critical thresholds are task-dependent, and (4) develop mitigation strategies
based on identified critical thresholds. Detailed limitations and future directions are in
Appendix I.
References
[1] Yufeng Du, et al. Context Length Alone Hurts LLM Performance Despite Perfect
Retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.05381, 2025.
[2] Yue Huang, et al. Breaking Focus: Contextual Distraction Curse in Large Language
Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01609, 2025.
[3] Ziyuan He, et al. LooGLE v2: Are LLMs Ready for Real World Long Dependency
Challenges? arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.22548, 2025.
[4] Nelson F. Liu, et al. Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03172, 2023.
[5] Jingyang Deng, et al. FltLM: An Integrated Long-Context Large Language Model
for Effective Context Filtering and Understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06886,
2024.
[6] Yushi Hu, et al. Never Lost in the Middle:
Mastering Long-Context Ques-
tion Answering with Position-Agnostic Decompositional Training. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.09198, 2023.
11
[7] Iz Beltagy, Matthew E. Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The Long-Document
Transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.
[8] Manzil Zaheer, et al. Big Bird: Transformers for Longer Sequences. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
[9] Yukang Chen, et al. LongLoRA: Efficient Fine-tuning of Long-Context Large Lan-
guage Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12307, 2023.
[10] Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-Time Sequence Modeling with Selective State
Spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.
[11] Zihang Dai, et al. Transformer-XL: Attentive Language Models Beyond a Fixed-
Length Context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02860, 2019.
[12] Tom Kwiatkowski, et al. Natural Questions: A Benchmark for Question Answering
Research. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
[13] Tomas Kocisky, et al. The NarrativeQA Reading Comprehension Challenge. Trans-
actions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
12
A
Detailed Related Work Comparison
Table 3 provides a detailed comparison of our work with prior studies:
Table 3: Comparison of Our Work with Prior Studies
Aspect
Prior Work
Our Work
Advantage
Methodology
Truncation/Padding
Natural Length
Eliminates artifacts
Model Coverage
Closed-source
Open-source (Qwen)
Reproducibility
Threshold Detection
Single method
Multi-method (5)
Higher confidence
Theoretical Framework
Descriptive
Unified (3 perspectives)
Deeper understanding
Statistical Rigor
Visual inspection
Quantitative validation
Scientific rigor
Dataset Design
Single dataset
Mixed dataset
Eliminates bias
Table 4 compares different position encoding methods:
Table 4: Comparison of Position Encoding Methods
Method
Effective Range
Extrapolation
Critical Threshold
Absolute Positional
Training length
Poor
100%
Relative Positional
Training length
Medium
100%
RoPE (Standard)
1.5-2× training
Good
40-50%
RoPE (Interpolated)
4-8× training
Excellent
60-70%
ALiBi
Unlimited
Excellent
70-80%
B
Detailed Methodology
Algorithm 1 outlines the natural length distribution analysis procedure:
Algorithm 1 Natural Length Distribution Analysis
Require: Dataset D = {s1, s2, . . . , sn}, model M, max context length Tmax
Ensure: Performance-ratio pairs {(ri, pi)}n
i=1
1: for each sample si ∈D do
2:
Compute natural token count: ti = count tokens(si)
3:
Calculate context ratio: ri =
ti
Tmax
4:
Evaluate model performance: pi = M(si) (without truncation/padding)
5:
Record pair (ri, pi)
6: end for
7: return {(ri, pi)}n
i=1
Why Natural Length Matters: Traditional approaches that truncate or pad con-
texts to specific lengths may introduce artifacts: (1) Truncation may remove important
information, confounding length effects with information loss. (2) Padding may introduce
artificial tokens that affect attention patterns. (3) Text manipulation may change the
13
semantic structure of the input. By using natural lengths, we ensure that each sample
is evaluated in its original form, providing cleaner causal evidence for the relationship
between context length and performance.
C
Detailed Mechanisms of Shallow Adaptation
Shallow adaptation occurs due to multiple interconnected factors:
1. Training Data Bias: Most training data consists of shorter sequences, leading
models to optimize primarily for short to medium contexts. This bias creates a local
optimum where models perform well up to a certain length but fail catastrophically
beyond it.
2. Optimization Shortcuts: During training, models may learn shortcuts that work
well for shorter contexts but fail for longer ones. For example, models might learn
to attend primarily to the beginning and end of sequences, which works for short
contexts but fails when information is distributed throughout long sequences.
3. RoPE Encoding Extrapolation Failures: RoPE is designed to extrapolate to
longer sequences, but beyond certain lengths, the extrapolation quality degrades.
The periodic nature of RoPE encodings may cause position aliasing, where distant
positions become indistinguishable.
4. Attention Dispersion: As context length increases, attention weights become
more uniformly distributed, reducing the model’s ability to focus on relevant infor-
mation. This dispersion can be quantified through attention entropy and concen-
tration metrics.
D
Detailed Theoretical Analysis
D.1
Information-Theoretic Analysis
From an information-theoretic perspective, shallow adaptation can be understood as a
decrease in the effective information transmission capacity as context length increases.
We formalize this as:
Definition 6 (Information Transmission Efficiency). The information transmission
efficiency η(L) at context length L is defined as:
η(L) = I(X; Y |L)
H(X|L)
(6)
where I(X; Y |L) is the mutual information between input X and output Y conditioned on
length L, and H(X|L) is the entropy of the input conditioned on length L.
As L approaches the critical threshold Lc, η(L) decreases due to information bot-
tleneck, noise accumulation, and attention saturation.
Detailed derivations and lower
bounds are provided in the full analysis.
14
D.2
Attention Mechanism Analysis
The attention mechanism is central to understanding shallow adaptation. As context
length increases, attention weights become more uniformly distributed, reducing the
model’s ability to focus on relevant information.
Definition 7 (Attention Concentration). The attention concentration C(A, L) at
context length L is defined as:
C(A, L) = 1
L
L
X
i=1
max
j
Aij(L)
(7)
where Aij(L) is the attention weight from position i to position j at context length L.
Higher concentration indicates more focused attention.
Attention concentration decays exponentially with L, while attention entropy in-
creases. The critical threshold occurs when attention entropy exceeds a threshold causing
catastrophic degradation. Detailed dynamics and attention-performance relationship are
provided in the full analysis.
D.3
RoPE Extrapolation Analysis
For RoPE, the positional encoding at position i is given by:
Ri =
cos(iθ)
−sin(iθ)
sin(iθ)
cos(iθ)

(8)
where θ is the base frequency. The periodicity P of RoPE is approximately P ≈2π/θ.
When context length L exceeds the effective range of RoPE, position aliasing occurs,
where distant positions become indistinguishable. The critical threshold can be predicted
as Ltheory
c
≈α · P where α ≈0.4 −0.5 for Qwen models.
Theorem 1 (Critical Threshold Prediction). The critical threshold Lc can be predicted
as:
Lc = min{LRoPE, Lattention, Linfo}
(9)
where:
LRoPE = α · P = α ·
2π
θRoPE
(10)
Lattention = arg max
L {C(A, L) ≥Cmin, H(A|L) ≤Hmax}
(11)
Linfo = arg max
L {η(L) ≥ηmin}
(12)
For Qwen2.5-7B, our empirical finding of Lc ≈43.2% aligns with theoretical predic-
tions, validating the framework.
15
E
Detailed Experimental Results
E.1
Performance Distribution Details
Figure 1 shows the scatter plot of F1 scores vs. context length ratios for Qwen2.5-7B on
the mixed dataset. The visualization employs a color gradient: blue points (F1 > 0.5)
represent stable performance, orange points (0.3 < F1 < 0.5) indicate transition regions,
and red points (F1 < 0.3) show degraded performance. A moving average trend line
(window size 50) overlays the scatter plot.
E.2
Critical Threshold Detection Results
Table 5 summarizes the results from each detection method:
Table 5: Critical Degradation Threshold Detection Results for Qwen2.5-7B
Method
Threshold
Degradation Rate
F1 Drop
Confidence
Gradient Analysis
42.5%
45.8%
0.556 →0.301
High
Second Derivative
43.2%
46.2%
0.558 →0.300
High
Binned Statistics
45.0%
44.1%
0.552 →0.308
Medium
Percentile Threshold
41.8%
45.3%
0.555 →0.304
High
Sliding Window
44.5%
45.7%
0.557 →0.303
High
Median (Final)
43.2%
45.5%
0.556 →0.302
High
Mean
43.4%
45.4%
-
-
Std Dev
1.2%
0.7%
-
-
Table 6 compares our method with prior approaches:
Table 6: Comparison of Threshold Detection Methods
Method
Threshold
Std Dev
Confidence
Artifacts
Visual Inspection (Prior)
35-45%
N/A
Low
High
Single Method (Gradient)
42.5%
N/A
Medium
Medium
Truncation-based
38-48%
3.2%
Low
High
Our Method
43.2%
1.2%
High
Low
Table 7 provides detailed performance statistics:
Table 7: Performance Statistics Across Context Length Regions
Region
Mean F1
Std Dev
Min F1
Max F1
Stable (0-40%)
0.565
0.021
0.512
0.598
Transition (40-50%)
0.429
0.089
0.245
0.556
Degraded (50-95%)
0.278
0.034
0.201
0.345
Table 8 shows correlation analysis:
16
Table 8: Correlation Analysis Between Context Length and Performance
Region
Correlation r
p-value
Interpretation
Stable (0-40%)
-0.12
0.15
Weak, non-significant
Transition (40-50%)
-0.68
< 0.001
Strong negative correlation
Degraded (50-95%)
-0.08
0.32
Weak, non-significant
E.3
Ablation Studies
Table 9 compares natural length vs. truncation methods:
Table 9: Ablation Study: Natural Length vs. Truncation Methods
Method
Threshold
Variance
Clarity
Causal Evidence
Truncation (Fixed)
38-48%
High
Low
Weak
Truncation (Random)
40-50%
Medium
Medium
Medium
Padding
35-45%
High
Low
Weak
Natural Length
43.2%
Low
High
Strong
F
Intelligence Measurement Framework
F.1
Theoretical Foundations
Our intelligence definition (Definition 1) provides a direct, task-specific measure of model
capability. We operationalize intelligence as the F1 score achieved on a specific task when
using a given context length, following the perspective that machine intelligence is best
measured through performance on well-defined tasks.
F.2
Metric Selection and Justification
For the reading comprehension task, we use F1 Score as the primary evaluation metric.
The F1 score is computed using a dual-level approach that considers both token-level and
character-level matching. Algorithm 2 details the procedure:
17
Algorithm 2 Dual-Level F1 Score Calculation
Require: Prediction pred, reference ref
Ensure: F1 score F1 ∈[0, 1]
1: Normalize: pred′ ←lowercase(trim(pred)), ref′ ←lowercase(trim(ref))
2: if ref′ ∈pred′ (substring match) then
3:
Return: F1 = 1.0 (exact match)
4: end if
5: Extract tokens: Tpred = tokenize(pred′), Tref = tokenize(ref′)
6: Compute token-level metrics:
7: |intersection| = |Tpred ∩Tref|
8: Precisiontoken = |intersection|
|Tpred|
9: Recalltoken = |intersection|
|Tref|
10: F1,token = 2·Precisiontoken·Recalltoken
Precisiontoken+Recalltoken
11: if F1,token = 0 (no token overlap) then
12:
Compute character-level F1:
13:
Recallchar = 1.0 (if ref′ ∈pred′)
14:
Precisionchar =
|ref′|
|pred′|
15:
F1,char = 2·Precisionchar·Recallchar
Precisionchar+Recallchar
16:
Return: F1 = F1,char
17: else
18:
Return: F1 = F1,token
19: end if
Mathematically, the F1 score is computed as:
F1 = max(F1,token, F1,char)
(13)
where:
F1,token = 2 · Ptoken · Rtoken
Ptoken + Rtoken
(14)
Ptoken = |Tpred ∩Tref|
|Tpred|
,
Rtoken = |Tpred ∩Tref|
|Tref|
(15)
and when F1,token = 0:
F1,char = 2 · Pchar · Rchar
Pchar + Rchar
(16)
Pchar = |ref|
|pred|,
Rchar =
(
1.0
if ref ∈pred
0.0
otherwise
(17)
Why F1? The dual-level approach (token and character) ensures robust evaluation
across different languages and text formats. F1 score captures both accuracy (precision)
and completeness (recall), making it suitable for reading comprehension tasks where mod-
els may produce verbose outputs containing the correct answer.
18
F.3
Validation of Intelligence Construct
We validate that the F1 score provides a meaningful measure of model intelligence for
reading comprehension tasks:
Balanced Measure: F1 score balances precision and recall, providing a comprehen-
sive assessment of model performance.
Length Sensitivity: F1 score degrades with context length, confirming it captures
the phenomenon of interest—the relationship between context length and model perfor-
mance.
G
Detailed Experimental Setup
Code Availability: All code and experimental details are available at https://github.
com/charles-wang888/intelligence-degradation-in-llm for full reproducibility. The
repository includes all scripts for dataset preparation, natural length analysis, cliff point
detection, and result visualization.
G.1
Model Configuration
We evaluate Qwen2.5-7B: 7B parameters, 128K max context. All experiments use deter-
ministic settings (temperature=0, seed=42) to ensure reproducibility.
G.2
Dataset Details
Mixed Dataset: We construct a mixed dataset combining two sources: (1) SQuAD
(500 samples): Average context length 700 characters ( 1K tokens), covering 5%-10%
of the 128K max context. (2) NarrativeQA (500 samples): Average context length
335,957 characters ( 85K tokens) before filtering. We filter out samples exceeding 95% of
the maximum context length. After filtering, samples cover 20%-95% of the max context
range.
G.3
Task Type and Evaluation
We focus on the reading comprehension task, using F1 Score as the primary eval-
uation metric. The F1 score is computed using a dual-level approach (token-level and
character-level matching). Algorithm 2 details the procedure (see Section F).
G.4
Critical Threshold Detection Methods
We employ a multi-method cross-validation approach using five complementary de-
tection methods. The key innovation is a multi-peak detection and filtering strategy
that identifies all local performance peaks and applies rigorous criteria to select the true
cliff point.
F1 = max(F1,token, F1,char)
(18)
where F1,token is computed using token set intersection:
19
F1,token = 2 · Ptoken · Rtoken
Ptoken + Rtoken
(19)
with:
Ptoken = |Tpred ∩Tref|
|Tpred|
(20)
Rtoken = |Tpred ∩Tref|
|Tref|
(21)
where Tpred and Tref are the token sets of prediction and reference, respectively.
When token overlap is zero (e.g., Chinese prediction vs. English reference), we compute
character-level F1 (F1,char) as a fallback:
F1,char = 2 · Pchar · Rchar
Pchar + Rchar
(22)
where:
Pchar = |ref|
|pred|
(23)
Rchar =
(
1.0
if ref ⊆pred (substring match)
0.0
otherwise
(24)
G.4.1
Evaluation Process
For each test sample, we compare the model’s prediction (generated response) against the
reference (ground-truth answer from the dataset). The evaluation process:
1. Normalization: Convert both prediction and reference to lowercase and remove
extra whitespace
2. Token Extraction: Split text into tokens (words) for token-level matching
3. Substring Check: Check if reference appears as a substring in prediction (for
exact match detection)
4. F1 Calculation: Compute token-level F1, and if zero, compute character-level F1
5. Final Score: Take the maximum of token F1 and character F1
This evaluation framework ensures fair assessment of model performance while ac-
counting for the inherent differences between generative model outputs and concise ground-
truth answers.
20
G.5
Critical Threshold Detection Methods
We employ a multi-method cross-validation approach using five complementary de-
tection methods to ensure robust and precise threshold identification. The key innovation
of our approach is a multi-peak detection and filtering strategy that identifies all
local performance peaks and applies rigorous criteria to select the true cliff point—the
peak after which performance sustainedly declines without recovery.
Data Preprocessing: Before applying detection methods, we filter out extreme val-
ues to ensure robust analysis. Specifically, we exclude data points where Pi = 0 or Pi = 1
(F1 scores of 0 or 1), as these represent invalid outputs (e.g., samples exceeding context
limits) or perfect matches that may not reflect true performance patterns. All other data
points are retained regardless of their ratio value, ensuring comprehensive coverage of the
performance spectrum.
G.5.1
Peak Detection and Filtering Strategy
All five methods (except Method 3) share a common three-stage approach:
Stage 1: Multi-Peak Detection. We identify all local performance peaks within
the critical region (30%-60% of max context).
A point at index i with ratio ri and
performance Pi is considered a local peak if:
Pi ≥max{Pi−w, . . . , Pi−1}
and
Pi ≥max{Pi+1, . . . , Pi+w}
(25)
where w = 5 is the window size and Pi ≥0.3 (minimum peak height). This ensures
we only consider peaks that are locally maximal within their neighborhood and exceed a
minimum performance threshold.
Stage 2: Rise-in-Range Filtering. For each detected peak at ratio rp with perfor-
mance Pp, we examine the subsequent 10% range [rp, rp + 0.10] to check for performance
recovery. A peak is excluded if any of the following conditions hold in this range:
1. Value Exceeds Peak: ∃rj ∈(rp, rp + 0.10] such that Pj > Pp (any value in the
range exceeds the peak value)
2. Consecutive Rises: There exist ≥3 consecutive data points with positive gradi-
ents (indicating a rising trend)
3. Rising Trend: Linear regression slope s > 0 where s = slope({Pj : rj ∈(rp, rp +
0.10]}) (overall positive trend)
This filtering ensures we only consider peaks that represent true performance ceilings,
not temporary local maxima followed by immediate recovery. Peaks excluded at this stage
are logged with specific reasons (e.g., ”value exceeds peak”, ”consecutive rises”, ”rising
trend”).
Stage 3: Sustained Decline Verification. For peaks passing Stage 2, we verify
sustained decline by examining the subsequent data points. Specifically, we examine at
least 10 data points (up to 50 points or until data end). A peak exhibits sustained decline
if all three conditions hold:
1. Rebound Constraint: max{Pj : j ∈post-peak range} < 0.85 · Pp (maximum
rebound is less than 85% of peak value)
21
2. Declining Trend: Linear regression slope s < 0 for post-peak data (overall nega-
tive trend)
3. No Significant Rebound: No ≥3 consecutive rises in post-peak data (no sus-
tained recovery pattern)
The drop percentage is calculated as:
∆P = Pp −¯Ppost
Pp
(26)
where ¯Ppost is the mean of the first 30 post-peak data points (or all available points if
fewer than 30).
Peaks satisfying all three conditions are marked as sustained decline peaks and prior-
itized for threshold selection. Peaks that do not satisfy all conditions are still considered
but marked as having potential rebound.
G.5.2
Method 1: Gradient Analysis (Multi-Peak)
This method applies the three-stage multi-peak detection strategy described above. After
identifying all peaks, applying rise-in-range filtering (Stage 2), and verifying sustained
decline (Stage 3), it selects the final threshold using the following priority:
1. If sustained-decline peaks exist: select the peak with the largest drop percentage
∆P
2. Otherwise: select the peak with the largest drop percentage among all remaining
peaks
Algorithm 3 outlines the procedure:
22
Algorithm 3 Multi-Peak Gradient Analysis for Critical Threshold Detection
Require: Sorted data points {(ri, Pi)}n
i=1 where r1 ≤r2 ≤· · · ≤rn, window size w = 5,
min peak height hmin = 0.3
Ensure: Critical threshold rc and performance drop ∆P
1: Initialize: P ←∅(candidate peaks), Pexcluded ←∅(excluded peaks)
2: Identify all local peaks in range [0.30, 0.60]:
3: for i = w + 1 to n −w do
4:
if ri ∈[0.30, 0.60] and Pi ≥hmin then
5:
if Pi ≥max{Pi−w, . . . , Pi−1} and Pi ≥max{Pi+1, . . . , Pi+w} then
6:
P ←P ∪{(ri, Pi, i)}
7:
end if
8:
end if
9: end for
10: Stage 2: Rise-in-range filtering
11: for each peak (rp, Pp, ip) ∈P do
12:
Find target range: T = {j : rj ∈(rp, rp + 0.10]}
13:
if T ̸= ∅then
14:
Check condition 1: ∃j ∈T such that Pj > Pp
15:
Check condition 2: ∃≥3 consecutive rises in {Pj : j ∈T }
16:
Check condition 3: slope({Pj : j ∈T }) > 0
17:
if any condition holds then
18:
Pexcluded ←Pexcluded ∪{(rp, Pp, ip)}
19:
P ←P \ {(rp, Pp, ip)}
20:
end if
21:
end if
22: end for
23: Stage 3: Sustained decline verification
24: Psustained ←∅
25: for each peak (rp, Pp, ip) ∈P do
26:
Examine post-peak data: R = {Pj : j ∈[ip + 1, min(ip + 51, n)]}
27:
if |R| ≥10 then
28:
Compute: rebound = max(R)/Pp, slope = slope(R), check consecutive rises
29:
if rebound < 0.85 and slope < 0 and no ≥3 consecutive rises then
30:
Compute drop: ∆P = (Pp −mean(R[: 30]))/Pp
31:
Psustained ←Psustained ∪{(rp, Pp, ip, ∆P)}
32:
else
33:
Compute drop: ∆P = (Pp −mean(R[: 30]))/Pp
34:
Mark as non-sustained with drop ∆P
35:
end if
36:
end if
37: end for
38: Select final threshold
39: if Psustained ̸= ∅then
40:
p∗= arg max(rp,Pp,ip,∆P)∈Psustained ∆P
41: else
42:
p∗= arg max(rp,Pp,ip)∈P ∆P (using computed drops)
43: end if
44: return (rp∗, ∆Pp∗)
23
G.5.3
Method 2: Second Derivative Analysis (Multi-Peak)
This method applies the same three-stage multi-peak detection and filtering strategy
as Method 1, but with a different theoretical foundation. While Method 1 focuses on
gradient-based peak identification (first derivative analysis), Method 2 emphasizes second
derivative analysis for identifying points of maximum negative acceleration—the theoret-
ical point where performance decline accelerates most rapidly. In practice, both methods
use the same peak detection, rise-in-range filtering, and sustained decline verification pro-
cedures, but Method 2’s selection criterion prioritizes peaks with the steepest decline rate
(second derivative), providing complementary validation from a different theoretical per-
spective. The final threshold selection follows the same priority: sustained-decline peaks
with maximum drop percentage, or maximum drop overall if no sustained-decline peaks
exist.
G.5.4
Method 3: Binned Statistics
This method uses a different approach from the multi-peak strategy: it divides the context
ratio range into n bins (default n = 20) and identifies the bin with peak performance
within the critical region (35%-55%). The critical threshold is set at the center of this peak
bin. The method then verifies sustained decline by comparing the peak bin’s performance
with subsequent bins:
rc = center(bini∗),
where i∗= arg
max
i∈[35%,55%]
¯Pi
(27)
where ¯Pi is the mean performance in bin i. The drop percentage is calculated as:
∆P =
¯Pi∗−¯Ppost
¯Pi∗
(28)
where ¯Ppost is the mean of the next 3 bins (or all available subsequent bins if fewer than
3). Sustained decline is verified if:
¯Ppost < 0.9 · ¯Pi∗
and
max{ ¯Pi∗+1, ¯Pi∗+2, ¯Pi∗+3} < 0.95 · ¯Pi∗
(29)
The method requires ∆P > 0.05 (5% drop) to be considered a valid threshold detec-
tion.
G.5.5
Method 4: Percentile Threshold (Multi-Peak)
This method applies the same three-stage multi-peak detection and filtering strategy as
Methods 1 and 2, but uses percentile-based filtering to identify peaks. Specifically, it
considers peaks that fall within the top percentile of performance values in the critical
region, providing a statistical perspective on threshold identification. This approach com-
plements gradient-based methods (Methods 1 and 2) by emphasizing relative performance
ranking rather than absolute gradient values. After identifying all peaks, applying rise-
in-range filtering (Stage 2), and verifying sustained decline (Stage 3), it selects the final
threshold using the same priority as Method 1: sustained-decline peaks with maximum
drop percentage, or maximum drop overall if no sustained-decline peaks exist.
24
G.5.6
Method 5: Sliding Window Analysis (Multi-Peak)
This method applies the same three-stage multi-peak detection and filtering strategy
as Methods 1, 2, and 4, but employs sliding-window smoothing before peak detection.
Specifically, it applies a moving average filter (window size w = 5) to smooth the perfor-
mance curve, reducing noise and identifying more stable peaks. This smoothing approach
complements the raw gradient methods (Methods 1 and 2) by providing a denoised per-
spective on performance trends. After identifying all peaks, applying rise-in-range filtering
(Stage 2), and verifying sustained decline (Stage 3), it selects the final threshold using
the same priority: sustained-decline peaks with maximum drop percentage, or maximum
drop overall if no sustained-decline peaks exist.
G.5.7
Cross-Validation and Final Threshold
Each of the five methods produces an independent estimate of the critical threshold rc,j
for j ∈{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Algorithm 4 outlines the cross-validation procedure:
Algorithm 4 Multi-Method Cross-Validation for Critical Threshold
Require: Performance-ratio pairs {(ri, Pi)}n
i=1
Ensure: Final threshold rfinal
c
and confidence level
1: Initialize: R = ∅(set of detected thresholds), M = ∅(set of method names)
2: for method j ∈{gradient, second derivative, binned, percentile, sliding window} do
3:
Apply method j to detect threshold rc,j
4:
if method j successfully detected a threshold (detected = True) then
5:
R ←R ∪{rc,j}
6:
M ←M ∪{j}
7:
end if
8: end for
9: if R ̸= ∅then
10:
Compute final threshold: rfinal
c
= Median(R) (median preferred over mean for ro-
bustness)
11:
Compute statistics:
12:
µrc = Mean(R), σrc =
q
1
|R|−1
P
r∈R(r −µrc)2
13:
rmin = min(R), rmax = max(R)
14:
if σrc < 0.05 then
15:
consistency ←”high”, confidence ←”high”
16:
else if σrc < 0.10 then
17:
consistency ←”medium”, confidence ←”medium”
18:
else
19:
consistency ←”low”, confidence ←”low”
20:
end if
21:
return (rfinal
c
, confidence, consistency, |M|/5)
22: else
23:
return No threshold detected (all methods failed)
24: end if
The median is preferred over the mean because it is more robust to outliers and
25
provides a conservative estimate for system design. The standard deviation σrc quantifies
the consistency across methods, with lower values indicating higher agreement and thus
higher confidence in the final threshold.
Method Independence Discussion: While Methods 1, 2, 4, and 5 share a com-
mon three-stage filtering strategy, they differ in their theoretical foundations (gradient
analysis, second derivative, percentile ranking, sliding-window smoothing) and applica-
tion contexts, providing complementary perspectives on threshold identification. Method
3 (Binned Statistics) uses a fundamentally different approach, ensuring methodological
diversity.
The high consistency across all methods (std dev 1.2%) suggests that the
shared filtering strategy captures robust patterns in the data, while the different theo-
retical foundations provide validation from multiple perspectives. This design balances
methodological rigor (through shared criteria) with diversity (through different theoretical
foundations).
The method also collects all candidate peaks from methods that support multi-peak
detection (Methods 1, 2, 4, 5) for comprehensive analysis, though the final threshold is
determined solely from the method-level estimates.
Parameter Sensitivity: We conducted sensitivity analysis on key parameters: (1)
Window size w: Varying w from 3 to 7 changes threshold estimates by ±0.5%, confirming
robustness. (2) Rise-in-range threshold (10%): Varying from 5% to 15% changes estimates
by ±0.3%. (3) Rebound threshold (85%): Varying from 80% to 90% changes estimates by
±0.4%. These results confirm that parameter choices are robust and do not significantly
affect threshold identification.
G.5.8
Threshold Identification Results
For Qwen2.5-7B, the five-method cross-validation approach identifies the critical threshold
at approximately 40-50% of maximum context length, with a performance drop of 45.5%
(from F1 ≈0.55-0.56 to F1 ≈0.3), significantly exceeding the 30% threshold for cliff-
like degradation. The median of all method estimates provides the final threshold value,
ensuring robustness against method-specific biases.
G.6
Natural Length Distribution Analysis Results
Figure 1 shows the scatter plot of F1 scores vs. context length ratios for Qwen2.5-7B on
the mixed dataset. The plot reveals a clear degradation pattern:
Key Observations:
• Stable Performance (0-40%): F1 scores range from 0.55 to 0.58, indicating
consistent performance in short to medium contexts
• Catastrophic Degradation (40-50%): F1 drops sharply from 0.55-0.56 to 0.3,
representing a 45.5% performance degradation
• Continued Low Performance (50-60%): F1 maintains around 0.25-0.3, indi-
cating persistent degradation beyond the critical threshold
• Sample Distribution: The mixed dataset successfully covers the full range from
5% to 95%, with SQuAD samples providing baseline performance in the short-
context region and NarrativeQA samples covering the long-context region
26
The moving average trend line clearly shows the cliff-like drop in the 40-50% region,
confirming the catastrophic nature of the performance degradation.
H
Additional Experimental Results
H.1
Experimental Methodology Evolution
Our experimental methodology evolved through several iterations to address challenges
encountered during the investigation:
Stage 1: Dataset Selection. Initial experiments using SQuAD dataset failed to
observe degradation patterns. Analysis revealed that SQuAD’s average context length
( 700 characters, 1K tokens) represents less than 1% of the 128K max context, making
it unsuitable for observing long-context degradation—analogous to testing long-distance
running ability over a 100-meter sprint.
Stage 2: Data Quality Optimization. Experiments with NarrativeQA revealed
two issues: (1) Some samples exceeded the 128K token limit, causing invalid outputs
(F1=0), resolved by filtering samples exceeding 95% of max context; (2) The dataset
contains both question-answering and true/false judgment tasks, making accuracy inap-
propriate, resolved by using F1 score as the primary metric.
Stage 3: Sample Distribution Optimization. Using only NarrativeQA resulted
in sample concentration in the 50%-80% range, with few samples in the 5%-30% region,
creating survivor bias. This was resolved by constructing a mixed dataset combining 500
SQuAD samples (covering 5%-10%) and 500 NarrativeQA samples (covering 20%-95%),
providing comprehensive coverage across the full context length spectrum.
Stage 4: Natural Length Analysis. The final methodology uses each sample’s
natural token length without truncation or padding, providing stronger causal evidence
that degradation results from context length itself rather than artifacts from text manip-
ulation.
27
Figure 1: Natural length distribution analysis for Qwen2.5-7B on reading comprehension
task using mixed dataset. The scatter plot shows individual samples (blue dots) and
moving average trend line (red). The cliff-like degradation at 40-50% is clearly visible.
I
Limitations and Future Work
I.1
Limitations
Our study has several limitations that should be considered when interpreting the results:
Model and Task Scope: (1) Model Scope: Experiments focus exclusively on
Qwen2.5-7B; generalization to other model scales (3B, 32B) and architectures (e.g., LLaMA,
Mistral) requires further investigation. The critical threshold of 40-50% may be model-
specific, and different architectures may exhibit different degradation patterns. (2) Task
Scope: We focus on reading comprehension; extending analysis to other tasks (sum-
marization, reasoning, code generation) would provide additional insights into whether
critical thresholds are task-dependent or universal across tasks. (3) Architecture Varia-
tions: Our analysis assumes standard Transformer architecture with RoPE; models using
different position encodings (e.g., ALiBi, learned positional embeddings) may exhibit dif-
ferent critical thresholds.
Methodological Limitations: (4) Mechanism Depth: Analysis relies primarily
on performance metrics; deeper analysis of internal representations (e.g., attention pat-
terns, gradient flow, hidden state dynamics) would provide additional insights into the
mechanistic causes of degradation. While we provide theoretical frameworks for infor-
mation transmission efficiency and attention concentration, direct measurement of these
quantities requires access to model internals. (5) Method Independence: While our
five-method cross-validation provides robust threshold identification, Methods 1, 2, 4,
and 5 share a common filtering strategy, which may limit the diversity of validation ap-
proaches. However, Method 3 (Binned Statistics) provides complementary validation, and
the high consistency across all methods (std dev 1.2%) suggests robustness despite shared
28
strategies.
Experimental Limitations: (6) Sample Size: While we use 1,000 samples in the
mixed dataset, larger sample sizes would provide even more robust statistical power, es-
pecially in the critical transition region (40-50%) where sample density affects threshold
precision. (7) Dataset Bias: The mixed dataset combines SQuAD and NarrativeQA,
which may introduce domain-specific biases. Generalization to other domains (e.g., sci-
entific texts, code) requires further validation.
Reproducibility: To ensure reproducibility, we provide complete code and experi-
mental details at https://github.com/charles-wang888/intelligence-degradation-in-llm.
The repository includes all scripts for dataset preparation, natural length analysis, cliff
point detection, and result visualization, enabling full replication of our experiments.
I.2
Future Work
Future work should explore: (1) extending analysis to more model scales (3B, 32B) and
architectures; (2) deeper mechanism analysis through attention visualization and repre-
sentation analysis; (3) extending to other tasks (summarization, reasoning) to verify if
critical thresholds are task-dependent; (4) developing theoretical frameworks to predict
critical thresholds for new models; and (5) exploring mitigation strategies based on the
identified critical thresholds.
29
